content/en/posts/epic-react-intro.md, before:

---
title: 'Epic React Series: Introduction'
date: 2021-05-10T12:45:39+05:30
draft: false
description: 'Introduction to the series '
hideToc: false
enableToc: true
enableTocContent: true
tags:
  - javascript
  - react
categories:
  - react
series:
  - Epic React
image: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a7/React-icon.svg/1200px-React-icon.svg.png
---

Hello world :wave:

Today I decided to start a new series on react based on [Kent C. Dodds's](https://kentcdodds.com/) [EpicReact.dev](https://epicreact.dev/) workshop. While I go through the content of this workshop, I decided to share the knowledge I gain from it. Hope you enjoy this journey with me :)

The content of this [workshop](https://epicreact.dev/) is self-paced and it is [open source](https://twitter.com/kentcdodds/status/1280710694640291840?s=20). But I recommended you to [buy the course](https://epicreact.dev/) if you are a visual learner.

In this article you can find all the blogposts I will be writing as a part of this journey. Feel free to skip if you are familiar with a particular topic.

## React fundamentals

1. [JS fundamentals for React]({{< ref "/posts/js-fundamentals-for-react.md" >}})
2. [Intro to raw React APIs]({{< ref "/posts/intro-to-raw-react-apis.md" >}})
3. [Understanding JSX ]({{< ref "/posts/understanding-jsx.md" >}})
<!--1. [Creating custom components]({{< ref "#" >}})
4. [Styling and Forms]({{< ref "#" >}})
5. [Rendering Arrays]({{< ref "#" >}}) -->
<!--

## React hooks

## Advanced React Hooks

## Advanced React Patterns

## React performance

## Testing React Apps

## React Suspense -->

Commit message:

New blog post and few more changes in others

content/en/posts/epic-react-intro.md, after:

---
title: 'Epic React Series: Introduction'
date: 2021-05-10T12:45:39+05:30
draft: false
description: 'Introduction to the series '
hideToc: false
enableToc: true
enableTocContent: true
tags:
  - javascript
  - react
categories:
  - react
series:
  - Epic React
image: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a7/React-icon.svg/1200px-React-icon.svg.png
---

Hello world :wave:

Today I decided to start a new series on react based on [Kent C. Dodds's](https://kentcdodds.com/) [EpicReact.dev](https://epicreact.dev/) workshop. While I go through the content of this workshop, I decided to share the knowledge I gain from it. Hope you enjoy this journey with me :)

The content of this [workshop](https://epicreact.dev/) is self-paced and it is [open source](https://twitter.com/kentcdodds/status/1280710694640291840?s=20). But I recommended you to [buy the course](https://epicreact.dev/) if you are a visual .

In this article you can find all the blogposts I will be writing as a part of this journey. Feel free to skip if you are familiar with a particular topic.

## React fundamentals

1. [JS fundamentals for React]({{< ref "/posts/js-fundamentals-for-react.md" >}})
2. [Intro to raw React APIs]({{< ref "/posts/intro-to-raw-react-apis.md" >}})
3. [Understanding JSX ]({{< ref "/posts/understanding-jsx.md" >}})
<!--1. [Creating custom components]({{< ref "#" >}})
4. [Styling and Forms]({{< ref "#" >}})
5. [Rendering Arrays]({{< ref "#" >}}) -->
<!--

## React hooks

## Advanced React Hooks

## Advanced React Patterns

## React performance

## Testing React Apps

## React Suspense -->

---

If you found this helpful, please give a shoutout to [@gsavitha_](https://twitter.com/gsavitha_) and share this article to help others. For more articles like this, subscribe to my [Newsletter](https://www.getrevue.co/profile/gsavitha) and get the latest updates straight to your inbox.
